Constitution
Article I – Name
Section 1
The name of the organization shall be the West Texas Association for Botany, a student organization at Texas Tech University.
Article II – Purpose
Section 1
The name of the organization shall bring together Texas Tech students that enjoy working with plants or are interested in learning more about plants.
Article III – Membership
Section 1 Members
a. Members must be interested in plants.
b. Members must represent the organization and Texas Tech University in a positive light at
all times.
c. Members must be undergraduate or graduate students of any major.
d. Members must be not allowed to participate in any activities or events hosted by the
organization while intoxicated or under the influence of drugs.
e. Members must treat their fellow members or officers with respect at all time.
Section 2 Anti-discriminatory Statement
The West Texas Association for Botany does not deny or define membership on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, gender, age, disability, citizenship, veteran status, sexual orientation, gender identify, or gender expression.
Section 3. Selection Procedures of Members
a. Prospective members must first request to join the organization through our TechConnect Page; or contact the organization officer.
b. Prospective members next must fill out our member questionnaire that can be found under forms.
c. Prospective member will need to pay membership fee per academic year, or serve as officer during that year, or complete service hours.
Section 4. Removal Process of Members
a. Any member or office can submit a member in violation of the organization purpose to the president.
b. Once the president receives the violation it will be reviewed at the next executive board meeting.
c. If the executive board finds the violation creditable then they will schedule a time for the member to come speak to the executive board about the violation.
d. after the meeting with the member in question the executive board will take a vote on whether to move forward with the removal process or not. A two-thirds vote is required to move the process forward.

e. If the vote passes to move the process forward, a vote will be brought to the entire membership for a vote to remove or not. A two-thirds vote is required to remove a member.
f. If the member is not present at the meeting where the vote took place, they should be notified of the vote within 24 hours in written.
Article IV – Officers
Section 1 Titles
The officers of the organization will be made up of: President, Vice President, Treasure, and
Secretary
Section 2 Duties
a. President duties include:
i. Overseeing and running regular, executive, and special meetings.
ii. Serve as the liaison to the advisor and the university administration.
iii. Calling and distribute meeting notices.
iv. Manage member violation report process.
v. Calling for annual meeting and lead the discussion of annual plan.
vi. Appointing event committee chair if needed
b. Vice president duties include:
i. Engage members in extracurricular activities recruit new members.
ii. Build and maintain cooperation with other organization/business.
iii. Maintain social media activities.
iv. Assist the president plan for the year.
c. Treasure duties include:
i. Log the membership payment and volunteer hours.
ii. Order and arrange the distribution of organization properties.
iii. Balance checkbooks and maintain knowledge over account balances.
iv. Make budget for events.
v. apply for funding from Student Government Association (SGA) and other possible funding agents.
d. Secretary duties include:
i. Draft events announcement.
ii. Coordinate the logistic of events.
iii. Take minutes during meetings if necessary.
Article V – Officer Election & Removal Process
Section 1 Officer Election Process
a. Nominations for officers will start in May of the spring semester by the person himself/herself or can be nominated by a regular member.
b. Nominatees can either accept or decline the nomination at the time the nomination is given or wait to the end of the 1-week period.
c. Nominations will then be open for 1 weeks.
d. During the 1-week period nominates can either drop or be added to the candidacy list.

e. On the way of election, which should be in early May, norminees will give a 3-4 min speech on why they are fit for the position, what they can contribute to the organization to make the organization better, and any ideas for the organization or the position.
f. Voting will then only commence if quorum is met. If quorum is not met before the meeting presides, then voting will commence the next earliest meeting time.
g. Voting will require a two-thirds vote of all eligible voters to elect a member to a position. The vote will be done using an online ballot to be tallied by the advisor.
Section 2 Officer Removal Process
a. Any member or office can submit an officer in violation of the organization purpose, their position responsibility, or constitution to the president.
b. If the officer in violation is the president, then it should be submitted to the organization advisor.
c. Once the president or the advisor receives the violation it will be reviewed at the next executive board meeting.
d. If the remaining executive board finds the violation creditable then they will schedule a time for the member to come speak to the executive board about the violation.
e. After the meeting with the officer in question the executive board will take a vote on whether to move forward with the removal process or not. A two-thirds vote is required to move the process forward.
f. If the vote passes to move the process forward, a vote will be brought to the entire membership for a vote to remove or not. A two-thirds vote is required to remove an officer from their position with an additional vote to determine removal from the organization.
g. If the officer is not present at the meeting where the vote took place, they should be notified of the vote within 24 hours in written.
Article VI – Departmental and External Relationships
Section 1 Departmental Relationships
a. The West Texas Associate for Botany has a relationship with the departmental of biological sciences. The relationship includes potential advisors and opportunities for funding.
Section 2 External Relationships
a. The West Texas Associate for Botany has a relationship with the Botanical Society of America (BSA). The relationship includes have a discount to register the BSA annual meeting (Botany), report student activities as a Texas Tech University Student Chapter. They also provide standardized rules and instructions participate the annual meeting.
Article VII – Finances
Section 1 Collection of Funds
a. Membership dues shall be collected at the first meeting in September
b. The Treasure should be responsible for applying for and documenting funds from the
SGA and other funding agent.
c. The Treasure should be document fund raising events or donations from individual or
other entities.

Section 2 Management of Funds
a. Any costs occurred by the organization may be paid by the President or Treasure.
b. All expenditures must be documented with an itemized receipt by the treasure.
c. All income must be deposit within 24 hours of receiving it. No cash is accepted only
check or electronic transfer.
d. Any funds donated to the organization shall be deposited into the West Texas Association
for Botany bank account within 24 hours of receiving it.
Section 3 Documentation
a. Documentation of any funds spent/gained must be added to the Financial Binder and available to all members with reasonable notice.
Article VIII – Meetings
Section 1 Quorum
a. Quorum will consist of a majority of eligible voters in the organization.
b. No business shall be conducted without the present of a quorum when it comes to a
voting meeting
Section 2 Voting
a. All votes will be determined by a majority vote of all eligible votes in the organization unless otherwise specified.
b. All votes will be taken by a secret ballot
Article IX – Advisor
Section 1 Selection Process
a. If the organization needs a new Faculty/Staff advisor, the executive board will take nominations from the membership.
c. The membership will then take a vote of the nominated faculty and staff to identify the top three candidates.
d. The executive board will meet with the top candidates in order most votes to identify a faculty/staff member that is able to serve as an advisor.
e. If none of the nominated faculty or staff are able to serve as advisors, then the executive board will speak with the Student Involvement Staff for suggestions.
Section 2 Responsibilities of the advisor
a. Provide feedback by listening and giving perspective insight for the organization development.
b. Support the organization in crises.
c. Interevent when appropriate. Especially when conflicts arise between members or
officers.
d. Be knowledgeable of university or national policies that may impact the organization.
e. Co-sign Expenditures such as SGA funds etc.
f. Provide connections to the group such as campus recourses etc.

Article X – Parliamentary Authority
Section 1 The West Texas Association for Botany shall use Robert’s Rules of
Order current edition, as its authority on parliamentary procedure.
Article XI – Legal Agreement
Section 1 The organization agrees to abide by all federal, state, and local laws; and by Texas
Tech University policies and procedures.
Article XII – Amendments
Section 1
Amendment to the Constitution can be passed by a vote of two thirds.
Section 2
Process for purposing the amendments to the Constitution. Include the date of the creation and/or last revision.
